




































DRAFT VERSION MAY 29, 2020
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 01/23/15

SEPARATING CMB STOKES Q AND U POLARIZATION SIGNALS FROM NON-GAUSSIAN EMISSIONS

UJJAL PURKAYASTHA1 , RAJIB SAHA1

Draft version May 29, 2020

ABSTRACT
In this paper we estimate diffuse foreground minimized Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) Stokes Q and U polarization

maps based upon the fundamental concept of Gaussian nature of CMB and strong non-Gaussian nature of astrophysical polarized
foregrounds using WMAP nine year published polarization maps. We excise regions of the sky that define position of the known
point sources, regions that are strongly contaminated by either the detector noise or by the diffuse foregrounds or both, and then
perform foreground minimizations over the surviving sky regions that constitute approximately 50% of the full sky area. We
critically evaluate performance of foreground minimizations in several ways and show that our foreground minimization method
removes significant foregrounds from input maps. The cleaned Stokes {Q, U} polarization maps have less EE and BB power
from relevant sky region compared to WMAP foreground-reduced Stokes {Q, U} polarization maps at different multipole ranges.
We validate our methodology by performing detailed Monte Carlo simulations. The main driving machinery of our method is
an internal-linear-combination (ILC) approach, however, unlike simple variance minimization performed in usual ILC method,
the core of the method being dependent on the theoretically well motivated concept of Gaussianity of CMB polarization a direct
connection is established between observations and models of inflation. Additionally, the method, like the usual ILC method,
is independent on modeling uncertainties of polarized foregrounds. It will be useful to apply our method in future generation
low-noise CMB polarization experiments.

Subject headings: cosmic background radiation — cosmology: observations — diffuse radiation

1. INTRODUCTION

Anisotropies of Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) ra-
diation are deemed to be the fundamental ingredients respon-
sible for the structure formation and therefore for the very ex-
istence of the Universe as we observe it and think of it today.
Soon after detection of CMB (Penzias & Wilson 1965) it was
realized that the anisotropic universe can induce polarization
in CMB with unique feature (Rees 1968; Negroponte & Silk
1980; Lubin et al. 1983). The anisotropies in CMB are ex-
pected to be weakly and linearly polarized (Crittenden et al.
1995) due to Thompson scattering at the surface of last scat-
tering and due to imprints of small fluctuations in metric that
could have been generated during the epoch of inflation (Guth
1981; Starobinsky 1982; Linde 1983). Although weak, Stokes
Q and U polarization anisotropies of CMB contain valuable
information about various physical processes in a wide range
of energy scales - starting from 1016 GeV or so, at the time
of inflation until today, when the energy scale of cosmolog-
ical interest is only ∼ 0.2 meV. To highlight the rich vari-
ety of problems that have been investigated in the literature
in this context we mention that polarization anisotropy can
be used to constrain primordial gravitational wave (Polnarev
1985; Crittenden et al. 1993; Frewin et al. 1994). Critten-
den et al. (1995) show that it is possible to infer about the
primordial tensor anisotropies from the correlation of temper-
ature and polarization of CMB. Kamionkowski et al. (1997)
find a method that can probe long-wavelength gravitational
wave and vector-mode perturbations of metric elements us-
ing CMB polarization. Stark (1981b,a); Zaldarriaga (1997)
show that reionization of intergalactic medium induces new
polarization in CMB. Spergel & Zaldarriaga (1997) argue that
CMB polarization can serve as a direct test of inflation. The
primordial gravitational wave as measured by CMB polariza-
tion can be used detect energy scale of inflation (Knox &

1 Physics Department, Indian Institute of Science Education and Re-
search Bhopal, Bhopal, M.P, 462066, India.

Song 2002). The effect of gravitational weak lensing on the
CMB polarization power spectrum and also on temperature-
polarization cross power spectrum was studied by Zaldarriaga
& Seljak (1998). Hu & Okamoto (2002) propose a method to
reconstruct large scale mass distribution of the Universe using
CMB polarization. Seljak & Zaldarriaga (1999) show that it
is possible to measure dark matter power spectrum by using
distortion of CMB weak lensing. Padmanabhan & Finkbeiner
(2005) proposes a method to constrain possible dark matter
annihilation at the time of recombination using CMB polar-
ization. Balaji et al. (2003) show that the parity odd Chern-
Simons terms in the effective Lagrangian containing Maxwell
fields can give rise to polarization axis rotation which in turn
could probe physics of very early universe. Planck Collabora-
tion et al. (2016e) argue that CMB polarization signal is more
powerful than temperature anisotropy signal to constrain any
possible sharp features in the primordial scalar power spec-
trum. Bucher et al. (2001) showed that polarization obser-
vations can constrain primordial isocurvature modes by lift-
ing its degeneracy with the cosmological parameters. De-
tailed theoretical framework for the study of CMB polariza-
tion have been developed by Kosowsky (1996, 1999); Cabella
& Kamionkowski (2004); Bucher (2015).

Following the discussion above, it is clear that CMB polar-
ization signal can be used to understand problems in Cosmol-
ogy with a diverse spectrum. Therefore, it becomes utmost
important to device a method that estimates a clean map of the
CMB polarization, which then can be reliably used to extract
these information. In real life, however, estimating a cleaned
CMB signal from observation in microwave part of electro-
magnetic spectrum is a non-trivial task since the net polariza-
tion signal that can be measured by a polarization sensitive
detector placed on Earth, or in space, contains both the weak
primordial CMB signal along with polarization signal due to
various foreground emissions that originate due to different
astrophysical processes that take place inside our Galaxy.

An interesting property of Stokes Q and U polarization sig-



2

nals of CMB generated due to primordial gravitational wave is
that they follow Gaussian distribution. Moreover the polariza-
tion generated at the surface of last scattering due to Thomp-
son scattering were directly proportional to the amplitude of
quadrapolar temperature anisotropy of that time. Therefore,
such polarizations signals again follow Gaussian distribution
with a high accuracy. The only assumption that we make
in both the above cases is simple slow roll models for infla-
tion – where any non Gaussianity generated are small (Allen
et al. 1987; Gangui et al. 1994, 2002; Munshi et al. 1995; Ac-
quaviva et al. 2003; Maldacena 2003; Komatsu et al. 2003) -
are valid descriptions. The anisotropies of the polarized fore-
grounds however follow highly non-Gaussian properties due
to complex non-linear physics involved in their origin. Mo-
tivated by the very accurate Gaussian nature of the cosmo-
logical Stokes Q and U polarization signals and highly non-
Gaussian signature of polarized foregrounds, in this work, we
seek to isolate cleaned pictures of primordial CMB Stokes Q
and U anisotropy signals from their observed mixture with
foregrounds, based upon the Gaussian nature of the former
and non-Gaussian nature of later. The method has been ap-
plied on WMAP temperature anisotropy data by Saha (2011).
In this work, we extend the earlier work to the case of CMB
Stokes Q and U polarization. A related approach in the con-
text of CMB which is useful to estimate maximally indepen-
dent components of a mixture is independent component anal-
ysis (ICA) (e.g., see Hyvärinen & Oja (2000); Baccigalupi
et al. (2004)).

The basic driving machinery of our method is the usual
internal-linear-combination (ILC) approach (e.g., see Ben-
nett et al. (1992); Tegmark & Efstathiou (1996a); Bennett
et al. (2003); Tegmark et al. (2003); Eriksen et al. (2004);
Saha et al. (2006); Hinshaw et al. (2007); Saha et al. (2008);
Gold et al. (2009); Kim et al. (2008, 2009); Samal et al.
(2010) for descriptions about ILC approach and applications
thereof). However, unlike the usual ILC method, wherein
data-variance is minimized, in the current work, we mini-
mize a suitably chosen statistic that quantifies the measure
of non-Gaussian property intrinsic to a set of samples. As
in Saha (2011) we take sample kurtosis as the measure on
non-Gaussianness of the samples and minimize this quan-
tity to estimate the cleaned CMB Stokes Q and U polar-
ization signal following the ILC approach. Additionally, as
discussed later in Section , our method relies on the black-
body nature of CMB spectrum (Mather et al. 1990, 1994;
Fixsen et al. 1996) and non-blackbody nature of spectra of
different foreground components. As a consequence of this,
our final estimate of cleaned CMB signal also preserves any
non-Gaussian CMB polarization signal along with the Gaus-
sian CMB signal, when both types have a blackbody spec-
trum. Thus our method also preserves CMB weak lensing
signal which possesses non-Gaussian properties along with
the Gaussian signals due to primordial Gravitation wave and
Thompson scattering at the surface of last scattering.

The ILC approach has been applied in the field of com-
ponent separation in the context of CMB in many differ-
ent forms. Delabrouille et al. (2009); Basak & Delabrouille
(2012, 2013) implement a needlet space ILC approach on
WMAP temperature and polarization maps. Remazeilles et al.
(2011b,a) generalize ILC method for non-CMB component
estimations. Rogers et al. (2016a,b) implement a scale depen-
dent, directional ILC method on CMB temperature and polar-
ization maps. Saha & Aluri (2016) apply the ILC approach
following a perturbative technique on simulated Stokes Q ob-

servations of WMAP and Planck at low resolution to estimate
variation of synchrotron spectral index over the sky positions
and jointly estimate all foregrounds and CMB components.
Sudevan et al. (2017) improve the usual iterative ILC ap-
proach in harmonic space by nullifying a foreground leakage
signal.

Among the non-ILC approaches we refer to Bunn et al.
(1994) and Bouchet et al. (1999) for Weiner filter method,
(Bennett et al. 2003; Hinshaw et al. 2007; Gold et al. 2011,
2009) for template fitting methods, Gold et al. (2009, 2011)
for Markov Chain Monte Carlo Method and Eriksen et al.
(2007, 2008b,a); Planck Collaboration et al. (2016b,a) for
Gibbs sampling approaches for component separation.

We organize our paper in the following way. We present the
problem that we wish to discuss in this work in Section . We
present our statistical variable to quantify non-Gaussian prop-
erties and to minimize foreground contamination in Section
. We then describe the basic formalism of this work in Sec-
tion . In Section we first discuss preparation of input maps
of our method. We then briefly discuss foreground and noise
properties of these input maps. Based upon these discussions
we identify regions of the sky where either foreground, or de-
tector noise or both are dominant source of contamination.
Using the knowledge of these regions, in Section we de-
scribe the mask that removes regions with strong foreground
or detector noise contamination. We use this mask later in
Section to reconstruct foreground minimized Stokes Q and
U maps. We then demonstrate the non-Gaussian nature of
polarized foregrounds using the empirical foreground model
proposed by the WMAP science team in Section , both i) from
the sky region defined by the mask obtained in Section and
ii) from the full sky. After demonstrating the non-Gaussian
properties of polarized foregrounds in Section we then de-
scribe how the statistical variable to measure non-Gaussian
properties (e.g., see Section ) varies with increase in contam-
ination strength of the non-Gaussian foregrounds. In Section
we describe non-Gaussian properties of the input maps due to
foreground contamination. We discuss variation of the values
of our non-Gaussian measure with detector noise contamina-
tion but without any foreground in Section . We discuss the
foreground minimization methodology in Section . In Section
we discuss the results and critically evaluate the performance
of the foreground minimization. In Section we discuss the de-
tailed Monte Carlo simulations of foreground minimizations
and results thereof. In Section we finally discuss our work
and conclude.

2. THE PROBLEM

The basic problem that we plan to discuss in this work is
as follows. Let, we have observations of CMB Stokes Q and
U parameters at different frequencies (and possibly at differ-
ent instrument resolutions) over certain region of the sky. As
discussed in Section slow-roll inflationary models with a sin-
gle scalar field predict that primordial anisotropies of CMB
polarizations signal follow Gaussian distribution with a very
high accuracy. On the other hand, astrophysical foregrounds
strongly deviate from Gaussian nature due to complex non-
linear processes involved in their emission process. We pro-
pose to provide a solution of the question of separating CMB
Stokes Q and U polarization signals from its observed mix-
ture with (non-Gaussian) foregrounds based upon the Gaus-
sian nature of the former and non-Gaussian nature of later.
We refer to Section for a discussion about non-Gaussian na-
ture of foregrounds.



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 3

3. MEASURE OF NON-GAUSSIANITY

Which statistical variable can be used as the measure of
non-Gaussianity? As in Saha (2011) we take excess kurtosis
as measure of non-Gaussian nature of a set of random values.
The excess kurtosis for a set of N random numbers Rk is given
by

K =
1
N

N∑
k=1

(Rk − R0)4

σ4 − 3 , (1)

where R0 represents sample mean and σ2 is the sample vari-
ance. Excess kurtosis for a Gaussian probability density func-
tion is zero. As described later in Section the excess kurtosis
for foreground contaminated Q and U signals tend to take pos-
itive values and increases quickly with the increase in the con-
tamination levels. On the other hand, the excess kurtosis for
a random Gaussian realization of CMB Stokes Q or U map is
close to zero. This makes the excess kurtosis an efficient esti-
mator for measuring non-Gaussian foreground contamination
in CMB polarization maps. In subsequent part of this paper
we use ‘sample kurtosis’ or simply ‘kurtosis’ to actually rep-
resent the excess kurtosis as defined by Eqn. 1.

4. BASIC FORMALISM

In this section we review the basic formalism (e.g., see
Saha (2011)) of estimating Gaussian Stokes Q and U polar-
ized CMB components from the mixture with non-Gaussian
foreground components. The basic driving tool of our method
is an ILC method in pixel space to estimate foreground min-
imized CMB Stokes Q and U anisotropy maps. However the
core of the method relies on a more fundamental concept of
minimizing the non-Gaussianity of the ILC map, rather than
minimizing a relatively simpler concept of variance that is fol-
lowed in the usual ILC methods.

Let we have observations of CMB Stokes Q or U polar-
ization over some region of the sky at n different frequency
bands. Further, we assume that all these maps have the same
instrumental beam and pixel resolutions 2 and they have al-
ready been converted to thermodynamic (µK) temperature
unit. If Mi(p) represents Stokes Q or U polarization signal at
pixel p and at a frequency νi where i ∈ {1,2,3, ...n} then

Mi(p) = Mc(p) + M f
i (p) + Mn

i (p) , (2)

where Mc(p) represents the CMB polarization anisotropy
signal at a pixel p. CMB anisotropy is independent on fre-
quency νi in thermodynamic temperature unit since frequency
spectrum of CMB follows blackbody spectrum. M f

i (p) repre-
sents the net foreground contribution at frequency νi and at a
pixel p. Finally, Mn

i (p) represents the detector noise contribu-
tion at a frequency νi and at a pixel p. We note that, in Eqn. 2
we have omitted any explicit reference of beam or pixel win-
dow function. This is justified since we assume all frequency
maps Mi(p) have same beam (and also pixel) smoothing ef-
fects. In other words, each component of the right hand side

2 In general, and as is the case of WMAP, the observed maps at different
frequency bands possess different instrumental resolutions, even if they have
same pixel resolution. Here we assume that all such maps have already been
converted to a suitably chosen and common instrumental resolution. If the
frequency maps had different pixel resolutions as well, one could use the
method described by Sudevan et al. (2017).

of Eqn. 2 should be interpreted as appropriately smoothed
versions of the actual sky components or detector noise.

Using the frequency maps Mi(p) the foreground minimized
ILC map, MC(p), is defined as the linear superposition of all
of them with certain amplitude terms wi that depends upon the
frequency band νi

MC(p) =
n∑

i=1

wiMi(p) , (3)

where the amplitudes w1,w2, ....,wn, defined as weight fac-
tors 3. To reconstruct the CMB component which follows a
blackbody spectrum we further impose a constraint on the
weights that w1 + w2 + ....+ wn = 1, i.e., the weights of all fre-
quency bands sum to unity. Such a constraint leads to effec-
tively n−1 independent number of weight factors. The weight
factors are obtained by minimizing ‘sample kurtosis’ (e.g., see
Section and Section ) of the cleaned map.

If the cleaned map, MC(p) contains N pixels following Eqn
1 the sample kurtosis of the cleaned map is given by

KC =
1
N

N∑
p=1

(
MC(p) − M0

)4

σ4 − 3 , (4)

where M0 denotes sample mean of the cleaned map and σ
represents standard deviation. Using Eqn 3 and the condition
on weights that they sum to unity one can show that

M0 =
n∑

i=1

Mi
0 , (5)

where Mi
0 represents the mean temperature of input map at

a frequency νi. Using Eqns 3 and 5 along with the constraint
equation satisfied by the weights, in Eqn. 4 we find

KC(W) =

 N(
WMWT )2

N∑
p=1

(
WMpW

)2

− 3 , (6)

where W is a 1×n row-vector with wi as its ith element. Mp
is an n×n symmetric matrix for each pixel p and is elements
are defined as, Mp(ii′) = M̃i(p)M̃i′ (p) , where M̃i(p) represents
the polarization (Q or U) signal at pixel p for frequency νi
after the mean signal corresponding to this frequency band
has been subtracted from the original pixel values. M in the
denominator of Eqn. 6 is also an n×n matrix and is given by

M =
N∑

p=1

Mp . (7)

3 Here we have omitted any dependence of weight factors with the pixel
positions at any given frequency νi. An important future project will be al-
lowing weight to vary with the sky positions, to take into account varying
spectral properties of polarized foreground components, e.g., synchrotron and
thermal dust components. Letting weights depend on the sky positions will
also allow them to be varied with different regions of the probability density
function of the net foreground emissions, which is expected to lead to better
performance of our foreground removal. We shall explore this problem in a
future publication. In the current work we treat weights to be independent on
sky positions for any given frequency.



4

FIG. 1.— Left column: figures, from top to bottom, showing the Q polarization maps starting from WMAP K1 to W band frequency maps, in the order of the
increasing frequency of different bands. Middle column: same as left panel but for U polarization map. Right column: figures showing magnitude of polarization
vector P = {Q2 + U2}0.5 using different WMAP frequency maps as shown in the first two columns. The low frequency Q and U maps are dominated by the
diffused galactic contamination due to synchrotron component. The high frequency maps of V and W bands also contain detector noise as a dominant source
of contamination apart from significant diffuse foreground contamination due to thermal dust component. The noisy nature of the polarization maps in the right
panel are clearly visible for the V and W band frequency maps. One of the important things that these maps show is that the WMAP low frequency maps are
dominated by the foreground contamination whereas high frequency maps have both foregrounds and detector noise as significant sources of contamination. All
the maps of this figure have a common instrumental resolution of 1◦.

5. INPUT MAPS

5.1. Data Preparation
In this work we use WMAP nine year published Stokes

Q and U polarization maps corresponding to different differ-
encing assemblies (DA) as the primary input maps. A total
of 10 DA maps are provided by the WMAP science team at
HEALPix2 pixel resolution parameter Nside = 512 at different
frequencies starting from 23 GHz to 94 GHz. Each of these
DA map belong to a given frequency band. A list of all the
DA maps, their frequency of observations and corresponding

2 Hierarchical Equal Area Isolatitude Pixellization of Sphere, e.g., see
Górski et al. (2005).

frequency band are mentioned in Table 1. Since each DA map
has different instrumental resolution corresponding to differ-
ent detector of WMAP satellite mission the DA maps are not
directly usable as is in our method. We first bring all the
DA maps to a common resolution corresponding to a Gaus-
sian polarized instrumental response function of FWHM = 1◦

at Nside = 512 by multiplying the spherical harmonic coeffi-
cients of each map by the ratio of beam window functions
corresponding to 1◦ Gaussian beam window and the native
beam window function of the corresponding DA map3. Each
of WMAP 23 and 33 GHz frequency bands (i.e., K1 and Ka1
bands) has only single detector each. However, since each of

3 We use WMAP nine year published beam window functions correspond-
ing to different DA maps in this work.



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 5

TABLE 1
LIST OF WMAP MAPS USED IN THIS WORK

Frequency Band Name DA Maps
(GHz)
23 K1 K1
33 Ka1 Ka1
41 Q Q1, Q2
61 V V1, V2
94 W W1, W2, W3, W4

WMAP 41 (Q), 61 (V) and 94 GHz (W) frequency bands has
multiple DA maps we average all the DA maps corresponding
to each of these frequency bands to form a single map corre-
sponding to each of these frequency bands. This results in a
total of five frequency maps corresponding to all K1, Ka1, Q,
V and W bands of WMAP for use as input in our work.

5.2. Foreground and noise properties
We show these input frequency maps after masking of the

position of known point sources in Fig. 1 in µK thermody-
namic temperature unit. The leftmost column of this figure
shows Q Stokes maps, in order of increasing frequency from
top to bottom, corresponding to five WMAP frequency bands.
The middle column shows the same except for the U Stokes
signal. The rightmost column shows the magnitude of polar-
ization vector, P = {Q2 + U2}0.5. Both the Q and U Stokes
maps are dominantly contaminated by the galactic diffused
contamination, both in the galactic plane and out of the galac-
tic plane for K1, Ka1 and Q frequency bands. This is clearly
seen from the plots of the first three rows of this figure. The
foreground polarization in the V and W bands are more dom-
inant in the galactic plane than the region outside the plane.
The V and W band also contain significantly strong detec-
tor noise which can be easily inferred from the plots of the
last two rows, specifically from the last two plots of the right-
most column. The transition from foreground dominated low
frequency polarization maps to both foreground and detector
noise dominated high frequency WMAP maps is clearly vis-
ible from the last column of this figure. We note in passing
that mean standard deviation from 1000 simulations of CMB
Stokes Q and U polarization signal at the same Nside parameter
and 1◦ resolution is merely ∼ 0.55 µK. This indicates that all
these frequency maps of this figure contain foreground and
detector noise contaminations that are stronger than the ex-
pected level of primordial signal.

6. MASKS

As described in Section and as seen from Fig. 1 the low
frequency polarization maps (K1, Ka1, Q frequency bands)
of WMAP have strong foreground contaminations both along
the galactic plane and away from the plane in both the hemi-
spheres. The high frequency V and W band maps are more
dominated by the detector noise along the ecliptic plane. Pres-
ence of foreground contamination can be visibly seen along
the galactic plane in all the five frequency maps (e.g., see the
third column of Fig. 1). Since presence of any detector noise
that is not negligible compared to the foregrounds signifi-
cantly reduces the efficiency of foreground removal, we chose
to remove regions on the sky that is heavily contaminated by
the detector noise. For this purpose we make a mask in the
ecliptic coordinate system that excise 15◦ on each side of the
ecliptic plane. We find the spherical harmonic coefficients of
this mask and rotate these coefficients to galactic coordinate
system using the HEALPix provided facility alteralm. We
then convert the rotated harmonic coefficients to a new mask.

FIG. 2.— The CMask or composite mask used in this work to define usable
sky region for the polarized foreground removal. The golden yellow region
shows the region defined by ±15◦ on both sides of the ecliptic plane and
galactic plane and are excluded in this work. The blue regions, which is
also removed in this work, represent the position of resolved point sources as
given by the WMAP nine year point source mask outside the golden yellow
region. The white region of this figure is used for foreground removal of this
work.

The resulting mask contains some pixels with values differ-
ing from unity or zero. We finally convert this mask to a new
mask by setting pixel values less than 0.5 to zero and rest to
unity. The resulting mask is a binary map and excise all the re-
gions defined by ±15◦ along the ecliptic plane in the galactic
coordinate system. To reduce contaminations due to resolved
point sources we also remove the position of point sources as
defined by the WMAP nine year point source mask. Finally
we excise all pixels of this mask that lies within ±15◦ of the
galactic plane. Our final mask is the product of the WMAP
nine year point source mask, the ±15◦ mask along the eclip-
tic plane and the ±15◦ mask along the galactic plane. This
final mask, called CMask (or composite mask) in our analy-
sis, contains a total of 1611603 surviving pixels at Nside = 512
implying a 51% sky region being used in our analysis. We
show the CMask in Fig. 2. The CMask region described
hereafter in this work refers to the sky region where CMask
takes the value unity.

7. NON GAUSSIAN NATURE OF POLARIZED FOREGROUNDS
FROM DENSITY ANALYSIS

One of basic principles on which the current work is based
is that the polarized foregrounds possess non-Gaussian prop-
erties. In this section we verify this assumption. To establish
the non-Gaussian nature of polarized foregrounds we rely
upon the polarized emission maps produced by the WMAP
science team. Both synchrotron and thermal dust emissions
are polarized. We verify non Gaussian nature of these com-
ponents using WMAP nine year base-polarization model of
synchrotron (at K band) and thermal dust (at W band) (Gold
et al. 2009, 2011). Using these polarized foreground maps of
these two frequencies we estimate the probability distribution
of Stokes Q and U polarizations of these two components
from the entire sky region as well as from the region that
survive after application of CMask. We show these distribu-
tions in Fig. 3 which clearly show deviations from Gaussian
nature. Although these distributions appear symmetric they
possesses sharp peaks which suggests non-Gaussian. The
decay of probability distributions on both sides of the peak
is concave upward for each case, which is in sharp contrast
with respect to Gaussian distribution. Moreover, the distri-
butions have long tails on both sides of the peak suggesting
non-Gaussian properties of the underlying Stokes Q and U
samples. The kurtosis values for each of the cases plotted in
Fig. 3 are shown in Table 2. From this table we note that syn-
chrotron emission at K1 band shows stronger non-Gaussian



6

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

0.045

−150 −100 −50 0 50 100 150
0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

−20 −15 −10 −5 0 5 10 15 20

P
ro
b
ab

il
it
y
d
en
si
ty

Stokes Q (or U) (µK)

Q Stokes, synchrotron, fullsky
Q Stokes, synchrotron, CMask
U Stokes, synchrotron, fullsky
U Stokes, synchrotron, CMask

P
ro
b
ab

il
it
y
d
en
si
ty

Stokes Q (or U) (µK)

Q Stokes, thermal dust, fullsky
Q Stokes, thermal dust, CMask
U Stokes, thermal dust, fullsky
U Stokes, thermal dust, CMask

FIG. 3.— Left panel: histogram of kurtosis values estimated from full sky as well as the region of the sky that survives after application of CMask for
synchrotron component for both Stokes Q and U polarization. Right panel: same as left panel but for thermal dust component. From these distributions one can
easily infer about the non-Gaussian nature of these components for both Q and U polarization.

TABLE 2
KURTOSIS VALUES OF STOKES Q AND U POLARIZATIONS FOR

FOREGROUNDS

Sky region Synchrotron Thermal Dust
Q Stokes U Stokes Q Stokes U Stokes

Full sky 149.193 54.009 11.302 8.132
CMask 7.892 4.766 2.852 3.985

properties than the non-Gaussian properties of thermal dust at
W band for both polarizations and for both sky regions. More-
over, for these regions the synchrotron Q Stokes signal shows
stronger non-Gaussian than the corresponding U Stokes sig-
nal. For the thermal dust component at W band, Q Stokes
shows stronger non-Gaussian than U Stokes over the full sky.
However, over the CMask sky region, U Stokes signal of
thermal dust is more non-Gaussian than the corresponding Q
Stokes signal.

8. CALIBRATING THE NON-GAUSSIAN MEASURE

Given that in Section we have empirically established the
non-Gaussian nature of polarized foregrounds, in the current
Section we attempt to understand how the kurtosis of diffuse
foreground contaminated CMB polarization maps changes
with the level of foreground contamination. We show this
in Fig. 4 by plotting the values of kurtosis for foreground
contaminated Stokes Q and U CMB maps as functions of
foreground strength, separately for each of Stokes parameter
maps, for two cases – with and without detector noise contam-
ination. To obtain CMB plus foreground polarization maps at
each of the WMAP frequencies with different levels of con-
taminations of foregrounds, we first form realistic foreground
polarization maps at each of the five WMAP frequencies us-
ing the WMAP nine year base-model for synchrotron and
thermal dust polarization components at Nside = 512 and at
1◦ Gaussian beam resolution. For details of the polarized
foreground model used in this work we refer to Section . We
randomly generate a realization of Stokes Q and U signal
for pure CMB using Planck 2015 best-fit power spectrum
(Planck Collaboration et al. 2016c) at Nside = 512 and also
at 1◦ Gaussian beam resolution. We add with the pure CMB
signal foreground Stokes signals obtained above at various
strength to form a number of CMB plus foreground only po-
larization maps at each of the five WMAP frequencies. We
apply CMask on each of these maps. For each frequency

band we find the sample kurtosis values from the surviving
pixels as function of the increasing foreground strength. The
variation of kurtosis values with the increase in foreground
contamination is shown in the left panel of Fig. 4 for CMB
plus foreground only case. Foreground strength, as plotted
in the horizontal axes of this figure simply represents the
multiplicative factors that were applied to the net foreground
signal at each frequency before adding them with the CMB.
As we see from the left panel of this figure the kurtosis values
increases quickly as the foreground strength increases from
zero for both Stokes Q and U signal. For larger foreground
strength the kurtosis values for all frequency maps almost
saturates (with minor fluctuations not visible in the scale of
these figures). Such behavior may be explained by noting
that by increasing foreground strength in these figures CMB
polarization signal becomes increasingly weaker compared
to the foregrounds. The saturation property of the graphs
then follows from a simple property of the kurtosis of a set
of samples that kurtosis remains invariant by simply scaling
all sample values by a unique constant. An important obser-
vation from this figure is the presence of a global minimum
in the kurtosis value for all WMAP frequency maps when
the foreground contamination becomes absent. The presence
of the global minimum also seen in the cases of foreground
and detector noise contaminated CMB polarization maps, as
shown in the right panel of Fig. 4 justifies globally min-
imizing kurtosis to eliminate the non-Gaussian foreground
contaminations. The right panel of Fig. 4 shows the variation
of kurtosis for foreground and detector noise contaminated
polarized CMB maps after application of CMask. For de-
tails of forming the the noise realizations we refer to Section
. For each frequency map only the foreground strength is
varied with the CMB and detector noise being compatible
to LCDM signal and WMAP frequency maps respectively
and corresponding kurtosis values are plotted as functions of
foreground strength. In interesting difference of this plot with
the corresponding ones of the left panel is that unlike the top
panel the kurtosis values increases even with the largest level
of foreground contamination for all frequency maps and for
both Stokes Q and U polarization. This can be explained by
noting that although polarized CMB signal is much weaker
than the polarized foreground contamination detector noise
contamination in WMAP frequencies is not negligible com-



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 7

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

K
u
rt
os
is
,
K

(S
to
ke
s
Q
)

Foreground strength

K
u
rt
os
is
,
K

(S
to
ke
s
Q
)

Foreground strength

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

K
u
rt
os
is
,
K

(S
to
ke
s
U
)

Foreground strength

K
u
rt
os
is
,
K

(S
to
ke
s
U
)

Foreground strength

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

FIG. 4.— Left panel: variation of kurtosis with foreground strength added to randomly generated CMB Stokes Q and U polarization signals for all five WMAP
frequency bands. Right panel: same as the left panel but in this case, detector noise consistent with different WMAP frequency maps and varying levels of
foregrounds are added to the same CMB realization as in the left panel. All plots of this figure are obtained from CMask sky region.

pared to the foreground contaminations. The rise of kurto-
sis values with increasing the foreground strength becomes
slower for the detector noise contaminated case compared to
the case when detector noise is absent . This can be explained
by noting that both the detector noise and CMB are Gaussian,
and noise is stronger than CMB but comparable with the fore-
grounds. Another important observations from this figure for
each frequency maps and for both Stokes polarizations overall
the values of kurtosis becomes smaller when the maps have
detector noise contamination added in them. This is expected
since in presence of detector noise foreground removal be-
comes less effective than the noise free case. Finally we note
that it is worth listing the kurtosis values from the CMask
sky region without any foreground addition but for both pure
CMB and pure CMB plus detector noise addition for both
Stokes parameters for the particular CMB and detector noise
realizations used to make the plots Fig. 4 . The kurtosis value
of the particular CMB realization for Stokes Q and U maps
are respectively −0.0224 and 0.1349 . Adding detector noise
to Q maps (with zero foreground level) increases kurtosis val-
ues that depends upon K1, Ka1, Q, V and W frequency bands
as follows, 0.2786,0.2113,0.2303,0.2261,0.2168. Similarly,
for the U polarization (with zero foreground level) the kurtosis
values increase with addition of detector noise to pure CMB
U signal (0.2298,0.1742,0.2086,0.1889,0.1971 respectively
for K1 to W bands.) Such increase in the value of kurtosis
with addition of detector noise may be explained by noting
that kurtosis values show larger variance when detector noise
which is a strong signal than the pure CMB polarization signal

TABLE 3
KURTOSIS VALUES OF INPUT Q AND U STOKES MAPS ESTIMATED FROM

FULL SKY AS WELL AS FROM THE CMask SKY-REGION.

Stokes and K1 Ka1 Q V W
sky-region
Q, Full sky 677.946 1178.631 1279.929 212.516 3.283
Q, CMask 17.751 8.154 3.444 0.251 0.418
U, Full sky 69.836 36.613 13.533 0.898 0.29
U, CMask 5.764 1.806 0.902 0.311 0.293

to the pure CMB Stokes Q and U polarization signals.
9. NON-GAUSSIAN NATURE OF WMAP MAPS

Following our discussions about strong non-Gaussian na-
ture of polarized foregrounds from the view point of density
analysis in Section and after providing justifications of using
kurtosis statistic as a measure of non-Gaussian property of po-
larized foregrounds (plus detector noise) contaminated CMB
map in Section in this Section we turn our attention to quan-
tify non-Gaussian properties are inherent into the five input
WMAP maps using the kurtosis statistic. We estimate sample
kurtosis of both Q and U polarizations for all five input maps
at different WMAP frequencies for the full sky as well as from
the region of the sky that survive after applying CMask. We
show these kurtosis values in Table 3. Although, K1 band has
the maximum power for both EE and BB power spectrum 2,
we note that the Q band has the maximum non-Gaussianity.
This clearly indicates that the non-Gaussian measure of this

2 This may be easily seen by plotting the full sky EE and BB power spectra
from the five input maps discussed in Section .



8

0

5

10

15

20

25

−0.15 −0.1 −0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35

0

5

10

15

20

25

−0.2 −0.15 −0.1 −0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35

P
ro
b
ab
il
it
y
D
en
si
ty

Kurtosis (Q Stokes)

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

CMB

P
ro
b
ab
il
it
y
D
en
si
ty

Kurtosis (U Stokes)

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

CMB

FIG. 5.— Top panel: histograms of kurtosis values from region of the sky that survives after application of CMask for pure CMB and pure CMB plus detector
noise (compatible to WMAP frequencies) maps for Stokes Q parameter. Bottom panel: same as top panel, but for U Stokes parameter. Clearly, addition of
detector noise causes the kurtosis values to deviate towards the positive sides for both the Stokes parameters.

work identifies some contamination which are not detected in
simple power-spectrum based measure of contamination. The
W band gets minimum kurtosis amongst five bands for the full
sky case, since it has lowest synchrotron emission level and a
thermal dust emission level that is also comparable to detec-
tor noise level of W band. After application of CMaskV band
gets minimum kurtosis (unlike W band for the full sky case)
which is consistent with the expectation that V band is min-
imally foreground contaminated within the observation win-
dow of WMAP. Moreover, as seen from the second row of this
table the kurtosis of Q polarization estimated from CMask sky
region gradually decreases from K band to V band. This par-
ticularly implies the excess contamination for Q band that is
observed in the measured kurtosis of the full sky Q band map,
arise from the sky region that is outside the CMask. For the
U polarization the kurtosis values decreases gradually from
K1 band to W band for both full sky and CMask sky. From
the systematically larger kurtosis values of Q over U polar-
ization for the full sky we conclude that the foregrounds in
U polarization possess less non-Gaussian properties than the
foregrounds in Q polarization. Moreover, for V and W bands
kurtosis values for U polarization estimated from CMask re-
gion, are comparable. This likely implies that detector noise
for V and W band for U polarization are at least as strong as
the thermal dust emission which is the dominant foreground
of these frequencies.

10. KURTOSIS VARIATION WITHOUT FOREGROUND

In section we have discussed variation of kurtosis with
increase in foreground strength for pure CMB plus fore-
ground contaminated maps and pure CMB plus both detector
noise and foreground contaminated maps for each of the five
WMAP frequency maps from the region of the sky that sur-
vive after applying CMask. In practice, to correctly interpret
value of measured kurtosis for both foreground and detector
noise contaminated case we also need to know typical values
and variation of kurtosis for pure CMB plus detector noise

case in the absence of any foreground contamination. For this
purpose we simulate 1000 realizations of pure CMB Stokes
Q and U maps at 1◦ beam resolution and at Nside = 512. We
apply CMask on each of these realization and estimate kurto-
sis values for both Q and U polarizations from the surviving
pixels. Histograms of these kurtosis values are shown in the
top and bottom panel of Fig. 5. The sample mean (µ̂) and
standard deviation (σ̂) for the Q Stokes for pure CMB maps
from the CMask sky-region are respectively −0.01251 and
0.04268. The corresponding values for U polarizations are
−0.01257 and 0.04818 respectively. As expected, the sample
mean (or standard deviation) values are nearly identical for
the case of Q and U polarization, which is expected since
both Q and U Stokes parameters are equally preferred for
CMB anisotropies. The histograms of kurtosis values esti-
mated from CMask region of Q and U polarization maps for
CMB plus detector noise case are also shown in Fig. 5 for
all the five WMAP frequencies 2. The mean sample kurtosis
for Q Stokes parameter are 0.2087,0.18,0.2378,0.202 and
0.2118 respectively for K1, Ka1, Q, V and W band maps.
The corresponding sample mean values for U polarization
are respectively 0.2071,0.1801,0.2386,0.1986 and 0.2123.
The standard deviation for both Q and U polarizations are ap-
proximately independent on any of the two polarization types
and frequency maps and varies approximately between 0.02
and 0.03. Comparing the sample mean values of kurtosis for
pure CMB and CMB plus detector noise cases, we conclude
addition of detector noise makes the kurtosis to significantly
deviate towards the positive values.

11. METHODOLOGY

A well known property of the usual ILC method (either in
pixel space or harmonic space at each multipole `) that relies

2 These histograms were obtained from 400 simulations of CMB plus de-
tector noise maps corresponding to each of the five WMAP frequencies. We
refer to Section for a discussions about generating the noise simulations.



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 9

upon estimating the weight factors by minimizing the empir-
ical variance of cleaned map is that weights can be directly
computed using an analytical expression. The analytical es-
timation of weights is possible in that case since the empiri-
cal variance of the cleaned map is a quadratic function of the
weight factors. As a result, the best-fit weights, which are so-
lution obtained by differentiation of the variance and suitably
setting the result to zero by employing a Lagrange’s multiplier
approach, satisfy an equation which is linear in the weights
themselves (e.g., see Eqn A3 in appendix A of Saha et al.
(2008)). Because of this linear equation weights can easily be
obtained in terms of an analytical equation (e.g., Tegmark &
Efstathiou (1996b); Tegmark et al. (2003); Saha et al. (2006,
2008); Sudevan et al. (2017)) in ILC methods that minimize
variance. In the current work we however minimize kurto-
sis as a measure of non-Gaussian properties inherent in the
data. Since the kurtosis of the cleaned ILC map is highly non-
linear function of weights, e.g., see Eqn. 6, (unlike the mini-
mally non-linear quadratic function as in the case of variance
minimization) differentiating this kurtosis with respect to the
weights following the Lagrange’s undermined multiplier’s ap-
proach does not result in a linear equation of weights. Hence
an analytical expression for weights for our current work does
not seem feasible. Instead as in Saha (2011) we develop a
code (hereafter called PolG to solve for weights that mini-
mizes Eqn. 6 by employing a non-linear minimization algo-
rithm due to Powell as in Press et al. (1989).

12. RESULTS

12.1. Foreground cleaned Stokes Q and U maps
First, we apply CMask obtained in Section to Stokes Q

polarization maps of the five WMAP frequency bands which
have a common resolution of 1◦, as discussed in Section . Us-
ing the PolG code we then minimize kurtosis over the surviv-
ing pixels of five Stokes Q polarization maps. Since WMAP
V band is expected to have minimum foreground contami-
nation from the CMask sky region, (e.g., see table 3), we
choose V band weight to be unity and all other frequency
band weights to be zero as the initial values of the weight
factors. For the Q polarization weight vector W becomes
(−0.237422,0.376352,0.136837,0.691807,0.032427) for the
minimum value of kurtosis 0.188642 This is clearly less than
the kurtosis values of all the five input WMAP Q polariza-
tion maps, estimated after application of CMask (e.g., see
Table 3). The PolG code generates, the maximum weight
for V band, since it is expected to be the minimally fore-
ground contaminated frequency band over the CMask region
as discussed in Section . It is interesting to note that both
Ka and Q bands get positive weights, whereas, at the low fre-
quency side, K band gets a negative weight. This is because
strong synchrotron signal at the WMAP low frequency side
(e.g., at 23, 33 and 41 GHz) is canceled by assigning negative
weight to K1 band, where the synchrotron contamination is
strongest and positive weights to Ka and Q bands where syn-
chrotron contamination becomes gradually weak. The highest
frequency WMAP frequency band, on the other hand gets, a
very small weight since this map is dominated by the ther-
mal dust emission. From table 3 we note that for U polariza-
tion both V and W band have similar kurtosis ∼ 0.30 from
CMask sky. This kurtosis value is well within the range of
kurtosis values we obtain from the simulations of pure CMB
and detector noise (e.g., see Fig. 5). We conclude from this
both W band V band U polarization maps which likely con-
tains detector noise contamination that is at the least compa-

FIG. 6.— Top: foreground cleaned Q Stokes map obtained by our method.
Middle: foreground cleaned U Stokes map. Bottom: map of P = {Q2 +

U2}0.5, using Q and U maps of top and middle panels. The cleaned Q and U
Stokes maps of this work together are referred to as QUGMap.

rable or in practice stronger compared to the foreground emis-
sion levels of CMask regions of these frequency bands. Be-
cause of larger detector noise contamination the V and W fre-
quency bands provide little leverage in removing foregrounds.
Also, in practice excluding these two frequency bands from
the analysis is not an option since one would like use a wide
frequency coverage for better estimation of CMB signal re-
moving foregrounds, particularly when data becomes noise
dominated. We therefore do not use U polarization maps to
estimate the weights. Instead, we simply use the weights ob-
tained for Q Stokes map to obtain a foreground cleaned U
polarization map from the CMask region. The kurtosis value
of cleaned U polarization map obtained in this way is com-
parable (∼ 0.333) to kurtosis of input V and W bands (from
CMask region). We show the cleaned Q and U Stokes maps in
the top and middle panel of Fig. 6. The corresponding map of
magnitude, P = {Q2 +U2}0.5 of polarization vector, is shown
in the bottom panel of this figure. Clearly the polarization
map shows presence of residual detector noise contamination
around the region along the ecliptic plane. Presence of some
residual foregrounds are visible near north galactic spur and



10

FIG. 7.— Left column: from top to bottom, input Stokes Q maps for WMAP K1, Ka1, Q, V and W band respectively (after applying CMask). Right column:
same as left column, but for U Stokes parameter.



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 11

on the southern galactic plane. Our cleaned Q and U Stokes
maps together hereafter will be referred to as QUGMap.

12.2. Comparison with Input Stokes Q and U Maps
A direct way to demonstrate the efficiency of foreground

minimization may be obtained by comparing the input fore-
ground (and detector noise contaminated) maps with the final
foreground cleaned maps by our method for both the Stokes
parameters. We show all five input WMAP Q and U Stokes
polarization maps after application of CMask in Fig. 7. From
top to bottom the left column of this figure shows Q Stokes
maps from K1, KA1, Q, V and W band respectively. The
right panel shows the same, but for U polarization. Compar-
ing this figure with top and middle panel of Fig. 6 we see that
our method effectively minimizes strong foreground that is
present in K1 or Ka1 band. Foreground contamination clearly
visible from north polar spur region and immediately below
the galactic plane for WMAP Q band for both the Stokes
maps. However, such features is absent in our foreground
cleaned map which implies efficient foreground minimization
by PolG. For W band the input maps show features that are
more consistent with contamination due to both detector noise
and foregrounds (thermal dust) and a visual inspection of fore-
ground minimization algorithm is not reliable. The efficiency
of foreground removal with respect to these input maps may
be clearly demonstrated by noting the standard deviation and
kurtosis values of all the maps.

12.3. Difference with Input Polarization Maps
What is the difference between the magnitude of polariza-

tion vectors estimated from input maps and our Stokes Q and
U cleaned maps? Such difference maps are of particular in-
terest since they show the performance of the algorithm in
reducing foreground power from the regions of the sky where
foreground are strong compared to both detector noise and the
expected level weak CMB polarization signal. We show these
difference maps in Fig. 8 from top to bottom for K1 band
to W band in the increasing order of their frequencies. From
the topmost image of this figure we see that strong foreground
contamination of K1 band is minimized in both the northern
and southern galactic hemisphere. Particularly visible from
this figure the efficiency of our algorithm from the left hand
side of galactic plane (on both hemispheres) and the ring like
structure in the northern galactic plane. The difference maps
for each of Ka1 and Q bands shows efficient foreground min-
imization near the north galactic spur region. For V and W
bands the difference maps tend to loose visual presence of
foreground patterns since foregrounds becomes comparable
to the detector noise level.

12.4. Variance Analysis
It is interesting to note that, the standard deviation values of

cleaned Q (5.50 µK) and U (5.48 µK) polarization maps from
CMask region match very closely to each other. The standard
deviations of five input Q polarization maps from the same
sky region are 21.14,8.94,6.48,6.25 and 8.44 µK from the
K1 band to W band, respectively. The corresponding values
for U polarizations are respectively 19.16,8.33,6.35,6.25 and
8.35 µK. This shows that our foreground removal method re-
duces the sample standard deviation of the uncleaned maps
by at least 0.75 µK for Q Stokes polarization and 0.77 µK for
the U polarization, when we compare with the corresponding
standard deviation of the uncleaned V band maps. When com-
pared with the K1, Ka1 and W band the reduction in strength
of contaminations are even stronger, indicating the efficient

FIG. 8.— Difference of magnitude of polarization vectors of the input maps
and output foreground minimized map obtained by our method. From top to
bottom images represent difference maps for K1 to W band in the increasing
order of the frequency.



12

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1000

1 10 100 1000
0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1000

1 10 100 1000

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1 10 100 1000
0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1 10 100 1000

CE
E

`
[µ
K

2
]

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

Cleaned EE

∆
CE

E
`

[µ
K

2
]

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

CB
B

`
[µ
K

2
]

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

Cleaned BB

∆
CB

B
`

[µ
K

2
]

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

FIG. 9.— Top left and bottom left: figures showing the EE and BB power spectra respectively obtained from CMask region from cleaned Stokes Q and U maps
of this work along with the corresponding spectra from five input maps (as discussed in Section ) after application of CMask. The vertical axes of both the figures
show the ‘reduced spectrum’, `(`+ 1)C`/2π. Top right and bottom right: The absolute difference of reduced EE and BB spectra respectively, estimated from our
{Q, U} cleaned maps and five input maps from CMask region. See Section for details.

performance of the method. In this context we note that since
CMB polarization is a weak signal than the temperature coun-
terpart, pure CMB (both Q or U Stokes maps, after smoothing
by 1◦ Gaussian window function) has a mean standard devia-
tion value of only∼ 0.55 µK over the same CMask sky region
with a sample standard deviation 0.018 µK. Even, consider-
ing the performance of foreground removal as compared with
the two lowest variance uncleaned V or W bands, one may
therefore conclude that a reduction of standard deviation by
∼ 0.75 µK using PolG code amounts to significant reduc-
tion of contamination compared to the weak CMB polariza-
tion signals. It is interesting to note that for both Q and U
polarization the standard deviations of cleaned Q and U maps
are less than the minimum standard deviations of all five in-
put maps, although our foreground minimization algorithm is
independent on variance minimization.

12.5. Power Spectrum
12.5.1. Comparison with Input Power Spectra

An effective way to discuss the efficiency of foreground
minimization by a foreground removal method is to study the
spectra obtained from the final cleaned maps produced by the
method and compare them with the corresponding spectra es-
timated from the input uncleaned maps. We compare EE and
BB power spectra of QUGMap obtained from CMask region
with the corresponding spectra of the foreground contami-
nated Stokes Q and U maps corresponding to five WMAP
frequencies (see Section for a discussion about how these
maps are generated). We show the results in Fig. 9. The top
left plot of this figure shows our cleaned EE power spectrum,
CEE
` = CEE

` `(`+ 1)/2π along with the corresponding EE spec-

tra estimated from the five input frequency maps, all spectra
being estimated from the CMask sky region. The top left fig-
ure shows the overall variation of the EE spectra for the entire
range of multipoles. The top right plot of Fig. 9 shows ab-
solute magnitude of difference of input and cleaned EE spec-
tra. For any of the five difference spectra of top right figure
we use solid lines if the value of cleaned EE spectrum is less
than the corresponding input EE spectrum of the correspond-
ing WMAP input map at any given multipole. In such a case,
some foregrounds have been removed by our method from
the polarization map of the concerned input Stokes Q and U
maps, at the particular multipole. If, on the other hand, the
cleaned EE spectrum is more than corresponding EE spec-
trum of any input map at a multipole the corresponding val-
ues of the absolute difference is plotted in points or dashed
line. Such points represent multipoles where our foreground
removal has not become very effective. As seen from the top
right plot our method reduces a significant amount of power
from input K1 and Ka1 frequency bands for all multipoles.
The cleaned EE spectrum is less than Q band EE spectrum for
` . 40. For V and W bands, except for lower few multipoles
our method effectively removes foreground power up to inter-
mediate multipoles. The bottom left figure of Fig. 9 represent
BB spectra (CBB

` = CBB
` `(`+1)/2π) of QUGMap and all five in-

put maps from CMask region. The bottom right figure shows
the absolute difference of BB spectrum of our cleaned map
and any of the input WMAP polarization maps. Like the top
right figure, the solid lines of the bottom right figure shows
the multipoles and frequency bands for which our cleaned
map has lower foregrounds. The points or the dashed lines
represent the multipoles for which our foreground removal is



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 13

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0 100 200 300 400 500

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0 100 200 300 400 500

0.1

1

10

0 2 4 6 8 10

0.1

1

10

0 2 4 6 8 10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

0.1

1

10

300 350 400 450 500 550 600

0.1

1

10

300 350 400 450 500 550 600

CE
E

`
,µ
K

2

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

QUGMap

CB
B

`
,µ
K

2

FIG. 10.— Comparison of EE (top panel) and BB (bottom panel) power spectra, C` = `(`+ 1)C`/2π, obtained from QUGMap with the corresponding EE and
BB spectra of all input maps used in this work at different WMAP frequencies, for different ranges of multipoles. The K1 band spectra remain outside the vertical
plot range shown in figures (1,2), (1,3) and (2,2). All spectra are estimated from CMask region.

not very effective. In top panel of Fig. 10 we compare the
cleaned EE spectra with the uncleaned EE spectra of five in-
put frequency bands from CMask region, for different ranges
of multipoles. Bottom panel represents corresponding plots
for BB spectra. The color codes of the sub-figures of Fig. 10
are identical to that of top left figure. The (1,1) (following
(row, column) convention) and (2,1) figures shows the overall
variation of EE and BB spectra up to multipole ` = 500. (1,2)
and (2,2) figures show that our cleaned EE and BB spectra
have less power than K1, Ka1, Q frequency band input polar-
ization maps for `≤ 10. Both EE and BB spectra are less than
corresponding W band spectra at almost all multipoles ≤ 10.
The V band EE and BB spectra are comparable, or less than
the cleaned EE and BB spectra at the lowest few multipoles,
however the cleaned spectra have less power than all WMAP
input maps soon as ` increases beyond multipole 10. This is
shown in figures (1,3) and (2,3). At higher multipoles `≥ 220
the cleaned spectra again possesses more power than V band
spectra (e.g., (1,1) and (2,1) figures). At even higher multi-
poles the cleaned spectra have more power than Q, V and W
band input maps, but less power than K1 and Ka1 band input
maps, as shown in figures (1,4) and (2,4).

We note in passing that the BB power spectra obtained
from power spectra are merely an indication of residual fore-
grounds and detector noise contamination. The measured BB
spectra should not be interpreted to be caused by the primor-
dial CMB signal since primordial BB signal is expected to be
of much lower magnitude, much lower than even CMB EE
power spectrum.

An important phenomena in the context of EE and BB
power spectrum estimation from partial sky is leakage of EE
signal to BB and vice versa (Tegmark & de Oliveira-Costa
2001; Lewis et al. 2002; Hansen & Górski 2003). The leak-
age requires careful analysis to extract accurate primordial
CMB signal from the mixture of EE and BB spectra obtained
from the partial sky. In particular Samal et al. (2008) suggest
that the leakage can be avoided if one converts the full sky
Stokes Q and U polarization maps to E and B mode maps at
the beginning of the analysis. In the current work, however,
we have chosen to apply CMask on the input WMAP Q and
U Stokes maps at the beginning of the analysis, without con-

verting the full sky Stokes maps to E and B maps at any stage
of our analysis. This necessarily implies that there would be
leakage of power between EE and (foreground plus detector
noise) BB mode in the all the spectra shown in Fig. 9. How-
ever, for the mere comparison of residual power in different
cleaned maps the leakage between EE and BB modes is not a
concern and therefore we avoid reconstruction of true EE (or
BB) that will be measured without leakage, from the partial
sky estimates of EE and BB spectra shown in Fig. 9. The
partial sky EE and BB spectra of this figure merely represent
the measure of residual contaminations and not any accurate
estimate of primordial CMB EE or BB power spectra.

12.5.2. Comparison with WMAP foreground-reduced Power
Spectra

WMAP Science team have produced a set of foreground
cleaned CMB Stokes Q and U polarization maps for each DA
except the DA for the K1 band (Page et al. 2007; Bennett et al.
2013). As described in Page et al. (2007) for polarization fore-
ground removal synchrotron emission is modeled by using the
K1 band Stokes Q and U maps taking care of weak CMB sig-
nal of this frequency band. The authors then, first, model ther-
mal dust intensity, I(n̂), at 94 GHz using FDS model eight of
Finkbeiner et al. (1999). Using this intensity model Page et al.
(2007) then obtain Stokes Q and U template maps using Eqn
15 of their paper. The templates then fitted with the data from
Ka1 to W band DA maps by minimizing the χ2 defined by
Eqn. 19 of their paper.

We compare EE and BB power spectra obtained from
CMask region of QUGMap with the corresponding spectra
of the foreground cleaned Stokes Q and U maps provided
by WMAP science team. For this purpose we first smooth
the Ka1 band Q, U Stokes maps to 1◦ Gaussian beam reso-
lution at Nside = 512 performing the smoothing operation in
the multipole space using ratio of the window function of 1◦

Gaussian beam and the native beam function of the WMAP
Ka1 band. For each Q, V and W bands multipole DA maps
available. We convert each of these DA maps to 1◦ Gaussian
beam smoothed maps following procedure similar to used for
Ka1 band. Moreover, for the each of Q, V and W bands we
average the smoothed DA maps over the available DA maps



14

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

0 100 200 300 400 500

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

0 100 200 300 400 500

0.01

0.1

1

10

0 2 4 6 8 10

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

0 2 4 6 8 10

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50

0.1

1

10

300 350 400 450 500 550 600

0.1

1

10

300 350 400 450 500 550 600

CE
E

`
,µ
K

2

Ka1
Q
V
W

QUGMap

CB
B

`
,µ
K

2

FIG. 11.— Comparison of EE (top panel) and BB (bottom panel) power spectra, C` = `(`+ 1)C`/2π, obtained from QUGMap with the corresponding spectra
estimated from all four WMAP foreground reduced polarization maps for different ranges of multipoles. All spectra of this plot have been estimated from CMask
sky region.

at the corresponding band. This results in a total of four fore-
ground cleaned maps for each of Q and U Stokes parameter
for Ka1, Q, V and W band respectively. We apply these maps
by the CMask and estimate their EE and BB power-spectra
along with the power spectrum, obtained from our QUGMap,
from the same sky region. We show these spectra at the top
and bottom panel, respectively, of Fig. 11 for different mul-
tipole ranges. The vertical axes of each of the images of this
plot represents C` = `(` + 1)C`/2π. Overall variation of dif-
ferent spectra between the multipole range ` ≤ 500 is shown
in the (1,1) and (2,1) figures. The (1,2) and (2,2) figures
show all the spectra at the lowest multipoles, 2 ≤ ` ≤ 10. At
` = 2 and 3, EE power from QUGMap, becomes comparable to
WMAP W band cleaned map, but larger than power in other
cleaned WMAP maps at these multipoles. We can expect that
some residual contamination is present in our QUGMap (and
WMAP cleaned W band map) at this multipole. However,
CEE
` soon catches up with the corresponding spectra of all

other cleaned WMAP maps as ` increases. At ` = 4, CEE
`

from QUGMap becomes lower than corresponding power of Q
and W bands, comparable to Ka1 band EE power and larger
than V band EE power. At ` = 10 EE power from QUGMap
becomes comparable to corresponding power of cleanest V
band cleaned map produced by WMAP. Similar pattern is also
seen from the BB power spectra shown in figure (2,2). In the
case of BB spectra power in our cleaned spectrum becomes
less than cleanest WMAP V band BB spectrum starting from
multipole ` ∼ 8. As shown in (1,3), (2,3), (1,1) and (2,1)
figures of Fig. 11 between the multipole range 220 ≥ ` ≥ 10
EE and BB power spectra obtained from our cleaned map has
less power than the corresponding foreground cleaned spec-
tra obtained from all four WMAP foreground cleaned maps.
Power spectra for the multipole range 300 ≤ ` ≤ 600 are
shown in (1,4) and (2,4) figures of Fig. 11. From these plots
we see that, at high ` clean EE and BB spectrum obtained
from QUGMap have somewhat more power than the WMAP
cleaned maps.

13. VALIDATION USING MONTE-CARLO SIMULATIONS

In this section we study our foreground minimization
method for Stokes Q and U parameters by performing Monte

Carlo simulations. We perform these simulations using CMB,
foregrounds and detector noise levels compatible to WMAP
nine year polarization observations. Before we discuss the
results of Monte Carlo simulations we first describe below
method of generating input CMB, foreground and detector
noise maps.

13.1. Input maps
13.1.1. CMB Maps

We generate a set of 400 CMB Stokes Q and U polarization
maps at HEALPix pixel resolution parameter Nside = 512 us-
ing a theoretical power spectrum that is consistent with Planck
2015 best fit cosmological parameters (Planck Collaboration
et al. 2016c). We smooth each of these maps by a polarized
Gaussian beam function of FWHM = 1◦.

13.1.2. Foreground Maps

To generate Stokes Q and U maps at the frequencies of
WMAP K1, KA1, Q, V and W bands we use the WMAP
nine year base model (that is model ‘c’) for foregrounds as
described by Gold et al. (2009, 2011). The foreground model
consists of a synchrotron and a thermal dust polarized com-
ponent with an amplitude and a spectral index defined at each
pixel. Specifically, the synchrotron amplitude map is pro-
vided at the K1 band, which is the frequency band where
Synchrotron component is most dominant in the WMAP fre-
quency window. The thermal dust map is provided at the
highest WMAP frequency band W, where the thermal dust
component is strongest. The amplitude of Stokes Q and U at
any given pixel are different while the spectral index is same
for both Stokes parameter for any given pixel. Since the am-
plitude maps are given at Nside = 64, in antenna Milli Kelvin
temperature units, and they are already at beam resolution
of 1◦ we simply upgrade their pixel resolution and convert
them to thermodynamic µK temperature unit. The spectral in-
dex maps for synchrotron and thermal dust components were
simply upgraded to Nside = 512. Let As(p) (Ad(p)) represents
the resulting synchrotron (thermal dust) Q or U map at the
reference frequency, νs = 23 GHz (νd = 94 GHz for thermal
dust), then, we estimate synchrotron emission in any of the
two Stokes Q or U parameter and at any WMAP frequency, ν



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 15

following

As(ν, p) = As(p)
(
ν

νs

)βs(p)

, (8)

where βs(p) is the synchrotron spectral index maps at
Nside = 512. In a similar fashion, for thermal dust emis-
sion, Stokes Q or U parameter map at any of the five WMAP
frequencies is given by,

Ad(ν, p) = Ad(p)
(
ν

νd

)βd (p)

. (9)

We estimate net foreground signal at any frequency ν for
any of the two Stokes parameters Q and U by superposing
Eqns. 8 and 9.

13.1.3. Detector Noise Maps

WMAP science team has provided effective number of ob-
servations, N i

obs(p) for each pixel, p for a DA, labeled by index
i (i = 1,2, ....,10) as an extension to the corresponding binary
fits file that contain temperature and polarization anisotropies
maps. The standard deviation of noise at each of the 10 DA
maps per unit observation is mentioned in Table 5 of Bennett
et al. (2013) in Milli Kelvin thermodynamic temperature unit.
We convert these standard deviation values in µK (thermody-
namic) temperature unit and call them σi

0 for the ith DA map.
Using these inputs we estimate noise realization for the ith
DA map following

ni(p) =
σi

0√
N i

obs(p)
Gi(p) , (10)

where Gi(p) represents a Gaussian deviate with zero mean
and unit variance corresponding to the DA under considera-
tion. The resulting noise map, ni(p) is smoothed in the har-
monic space by the ratio of beam window function corre-
sponding to 1◦ polarized Gaussian beam and the WMAP nine
year supplied beam functions corresponding to different DAs.
We generate 400 noise simulations for each WMAP DAs.
We form ‘frequency-band’ noise maps for each of Q, V and
W bands by averaging over noise maps of all DAs available
within a given frequency band. At the end of these opera-
tions we obtain 400 noise simulations for each of five WMAP
frequency bands and for each of Stokes Q and U parameters
at 1◦ beam resolution and at Nside = 512. We note that noise
maps for different frequency maps and different simulations
have uncorrelated noise properties.

13.2. Results
Using foreground maps corresponding to five WMAP fre-

quency bands, 400 CMB simulations and additionally 400
noise simulations for each of WMAP frequency maps, as dis-
cussed in Section we form a total of 400 realizations of fore-
ground and detector noise contaminated CMB polarization
maps for each of Stokes Q and U parameters for each of five
WMAP frequencies. This effectively give us a set of 400 re-
alizations, each of which contain five maps corresponding to
five WMAP frequencies for each Stokes parameter. As is the
case for our analysis on the WMAP data we apply CMask
on each of these maps before foreground minimization. For
the simulation of foreground removal procedure we separately

clean the Q polarization and U polarization maps. For Q
polarization maps we minimize the kurtosis with respect to
weights of three WMAP bands, K1, Q and W respectively.
For this purpose we initialize the weights in PolG code for
K1, Q, W bands as −0.3,0.3,−0.3 respectively. We fix the
Ka1 band weights to 0.5 for all the simulations of foreground
minimization. For each of these simulations V band weight is
obtained from the constrained equation that weights must add
to unity to preserve the CMB Q polarization anisotropy, due
to blackbody nature of CMB frequency spectrum. Since CMB
polarization anisotropy is a weak signal compared to detector
noise contamination at WMAP frequencies, weights in some
of these simulations that have not been properly converged
give rise to undesired and high foreground residuals. To avoid
such simulations from our analysis, from all the 400 sets of
weights obtained after the end of all simulations we take only
those sets of weights for which the V band weight lies be-
tween 0.2 and 1.1. We find that such a choice of prior on
the V band weight is sufficient to remove simulations that re-
sulted in any visibly excess power in the final {Q, U} cleaned
maps. Using the set of all weights from 289 simulations for
which the V band weights lie within the chosen range of prior,
we obtain the foreground cleaned map for Q Stokes parame-
ter from the CMask region. We also use the same sets of
weights to obtain 289 foreground cleaned maps of U Stokes
polarization from the sky region survived after application of
the CMask. From each of these cleaned partial sky {Q, U}
polarization maps we obtain both EE and BB angular power
spectra. We show the average of all such EE and BB spec-
tra, `(` + 1)C`/2π, in µK2 thermodynamic temperature unit,
along with the error-bars estimated from these simulations in
top left panel of Fig. 12. We note that the non-zero BB spec-
trum in this plot indicates presence of residual foregrounds
and detector noise, and does not represent any primordial BB
power spectrum, since the initial theoretical power spectrum
from which the CMB Stokes Q and U polarization maps were
generated contained no BB spectrum. Some portion of the
BB spectrum seen in this figure is caused due to leakage of
EE signal to BB signal due finite sky area effect.

Following a procedure similar to estimating the partial sky
foreground cleaned {Q, U} maps using the weights obtained
from Q Stokes maps alone, we also estimate a set of cleaned
maps {Q, U} maps from the same sky region using weights
that are estimated using the U maps alone. In this case, we ini-
tialize, K1, Q and W band weights to the identical values as
the Q polarization case discussed in the preceding paragraph.
We fix the Ka1 band weight to 0.5 and the PolG code then
estimates the V band weights from the constrained equation
satisfied by the weights. Imposing the prior [0.2,1.1] on the
resulting 400 V band weights we find that a set of 256 simula-
tions for which the final V band weights fulfill the prior condi-
tion. Using these weights we estimate foreground cleaned {Q,
U} maps from the sky region that survives after application of
CMask. We estimate partial sky EE and BB angular power
spectra from each of these foreground cleaned maps. In top
right panel of Fig. 12 we show the mean of all such spectra
along with the error-bar computed from the same set of sim-
ulations. The mean EE and BB spectra match well with the
corresponding spectra obtained from the cleaned maps that
were estimated from the weights obtained from Q polariza-
tion maps alone. The difference of EE spectra of top panels
is shown in red line in bottom panel. Also shown in bottom
panel of Fig. 12, the difference of BB spectra in blue. The



16

0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1 10 100 1000
0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1 10 100 1000

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

1 10 100 1000

EE, Weights from Stokes Q
BB, Weights from Stokes Q

EE
BB

Theory CEE
`

EE, Weights from Stokes U
BB, Weights from Stokes U

EE
BB

Theory CEE
`

EE, di�
EE, error
BB, di�

BB, error

FIG. 12.— In top left panel, mean EE and BB angular power spectra, `(`+ 1)C`/2π, in µK2 thermodynamic temperature unit, from CMask sky region plotted
in violet and green color. The mean spectra are computed from 289 Monte Carlo simulations of the foreground minimization using the weights estimated from
the Stokes Q maps, alone. Violet and green curves of top right panel are same as those of left panel except that these mean spectra are computed from 256 Monte
Carlo simulations with weights obtained from Stokes U maps alone. In both these panels we show the full sky theoretical EE spectrum expected from LCDM
model. The dark blue and red curves of both the top panels represent EE and BB spectra respectively, from the CMask sky, from 400 Monte Carlo simulations
of pure CMB Stokes Q and U maps. The error bars represent cosmic plus sample variance. The red curve, representing the non-zero BB spectrum is actually
leakage of EE signal to BB on the partial sky. The bottom panel represent the difference of EE spectra (in red) of top two panels and the difference of BB spectra
(blue) of the same two panels, in µK2 thermodynamic temperature unit. The green and orange lines show 1σ error lines on EE and BB spectra obtained from
simulations where weights from Stokes Q maps alone are used.

green and blue curves of the bottom panel shows 1σ error
lines. From the difference spectra and error line plots we con-
clude that our foreground minimization method works overall
with the similar efficiency for both Stokes Q and U polar-
izations maps separately. We again emphasize that the BB
spectra in this case is mere indication of presence of residual
foreground and detector noise in the final cleaned maps, and
not the primordial BB signal.

We compare the mean cleaned EE and BB power spectra es-
timated from accepted Monte Carlo simulations (for the case
when weights are determined by the Q Stokes maps) along
with the mean EE and BB spectra of each of five simulated
frequency maps from the 400 simulations in top left and bot-
tom left of Fig. 13. All spectra of these figures are esti-
mated from CMask sky region and are multiplied by the factor
`(`+1)/2π. The error bars of these figures are estimated from
Monte Carlo simulations. The reduced power in the cleaned
maps indicate efficiency of foreground minimization using the
method described in this work. The top right figure represent
the absolute difference of mean cleaned EE spectrum and the
mean spectra of each of five input maps of Monte Carlo sim-
ulations and represent the appropriate difference spectra us-
ing the results shown in top left panel. The solid lines of top
right panel represent the case when the mean EE spectrum
has less power than the power of an input map, implying an
effective foreground removal has taken place for the partic-
ular frequency band and for the particular multipole(s). The
dashed lines and points of these plots represent multipoles for
which mean cleaned EE spectrum is higher than the spectrum
of an input frequency map. Hence foreground minimization
at these multipoles and frequency band is not very effective.

The bottom right figure of Fig. 13 shows the same as top right
figure, except that the bottom right figure shows the case for
BB spectra.

How does the weights vary with the simulations? We have
shown the weights for each of K1, Ka1, Q, V and W bands
from the accepted simulations as a function of simulation in-
dex in Fig. 14. Left panel of this figure shows the case when
weights are estimated only from Q Stokes maps alone. The
right panel shows the case when weights are estimated from
the U polarization maps alone. In both cases we see that
weights for K1 band have minimum dispersion since it has
the maximum signal to noise ratio for the foregrounds due
to strong synchrotron emission. The V band weights have
the largest dispersion since V band weights are estimated pas-
sively, i.e., from the constrained equation of weights given the
values of weights of rest of the frequency bands.

14. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

Simple models of inflation predict that the fluctuations in
the primordial inflaton field were Gaussian to very good ap-
proximations. The Gaussian nature of the primordial den-
sity fluctuations directly imply that the CMB anisotropies also
follow Gaussian distribution, since the later is related to the
former by means of a multiplicative transfer function. Us-
ing the concept of Gaussian distribution of CMB polarization
anisotropies and strongly non-Gaussian nature of diffused po-
larized emissions from Milky Way, in this work we have pro-
posed a methodology to separate the former from the observed
mixture of the later using the WMAP nine year Stokes Q and
U polarization maps, from a region of the sky that excludes re-
gions heavily contaminated by foregrounds or detector noise.

For cosmological analysis of observed CMB polarization



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 17

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1000

1 10 100 1000
0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1000

1 10 100 1000

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1 10 100 1000
0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1 10 100 1000

CE
E

`
[µ
K

2
]

Cleaned spectrum
K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

∆
CE

E
`

[µ
K

2
]

K1|
Ka1
Q
V|
W

CB
B

`
[µ
K

2
]

Cleaned spectrum
K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

∆
CB

B
`

[µ
K

2
]

K1
Ka1
Q
V|
W

FIG. 13.— Top left and bottom left: figures showing the mean EE and BB power spectra respectively obtained from CMask region from cleaned Stokes Q
and U maps obtained from Monte Carlo simulations along with the corresponding mean spectra from simulated input maps from the CMask sky region. The
vertical axes of both the figures show the ‘reduced spectrum’, `(`+ 1)C`/2π. Top right and bottom right: The absolute difference of reduced EE and BB spectra
respectively, estimated from our {Q, U} cleaned maps and five input maps from CMask region. See Section for details.

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0 50 100 150 200 250 300
−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

0 50 100 150 200 250 300

Monte Carlo simulations

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

Monte Carlo simulations

K1
Ka1
Q
V
W

FIG. 14.— Variation of weights for different frequency maps for different Monte Carlo simulations of our foreground removal procedure. Left panel represents
the case when weights are estimated from the Q Stokes maps alone. The right panel shows the variation when weights are estimated from the Stokes U maps
alone.

maps a major task is to minimize the foreground contamina-
tions. The foreground polarization may be rather complex –
apart from variation of spectral spectral indices with sky lo-
cations for both synchrotron and thermal dust Stokes Q and
U signals, thermal dust emission may exhibit high fraction
of polarization even from regions where the signal is weak.
In this context, the reconstruction of CMB polarization maps
presented in this article has two important advantages. First,
since the method uses usual ILC technique as the basic driv-
ing machinery, one does not need to use any explicit model

for polarized foregrounds. Thus our method possesses an in-
teresting property that the foreground minimized CMB Stokes
maps are free from any error that could otherwise result from
any incorrect foreground modeling. The only assumption we
make about the foreground spectrum is that they are non-
blackbody. This is a valid assumption for polarized emis-
sions like synchrotron and thermal dust. The second, and very
important in the context of physics of early universe, advan-
tage of our method, is that, our method minimizes a measure
of non-Gaussian properties to estimate the foreground mini-



18

mized CMB polarization map. The assumption of Gaussian
properties of CMB anisotropies is motivated from the sim-
plest models of inflation. The non-Gaussian nature of po-
larized foreground emission is expected due to various non-
linear mechanisms that operate during their emission. We
demonstrate strong non-Gaussian properties of polarized fore-
grounds based upon empirical results.

We have critically studied the performance of our polar-
ized foreground minimization. Based upon these studies we
conclude that the method removes significant amount of fore-
grounds from different frequency bands. The performance of
the method is expected to be even superior for future CMB
polarization experiments with low level of detector noise
compared to the primordial CMB polarization signal, since
detector noise plays a stringent ‘bottle-neck’ for effective
foreground minimization. Interestingly, our foreground min-
imized Stoke Q and U maps have less power (both EE and
BB) than the WMAP template cleaned maps. This shows that,
when analyzed over the CMask region our method performs
a better foreground removal than a global foreground removal
method as followed by the WMAP Science team using tem-
plate models for the polarized foregrounds. In spite of this,
we make a cautious comment that there is indeed residual
foregrounds and detector noise in our cleaned Stokes Q and
U maps. Great care must be taken, for cosmological analy-
sis of these cleaned maps. It would be very useful to apply
our method on the polarization observations of Planck and
polarization specific future CMB missions.

Analyzing our cleaned EE and BB spectra we find that
performance of foreground removal depends upon the multi-
poles. This is expected since foreground spectra themselves

depend upon multipoles and moreover detector noise usually
become stronger at higher multipoles. To achieve a better
foreground removal an interesting future project will be to
generalize our method in the multipole space.

One interesting property of our method is that, although it
minimizes non-Gaussian property of foregrounds, any non-
Gaussianities intrinsic to CMB remains preserved in the final
cleaned map, since CMB follows blackbody spectrum with
high accuracy. The condition that weights for all frequency
maps add to unity preserves CMB polarization signal even if
it has some minute level of non-Gaussianities. In this context
we mention that our method will be able to provide a com-
plete picture of CMB anisotropies for models of inflation that
produces some level of primordial non-Gaussianity, e.g., see
Wands (2010) for a discussion of local non-Gaussian from in-
flation, or Bartolo et al. (2004) and Planck Collaboration et al.
(2016d, 2014) with references therein for comprehensive re-
views about non-Gaussianities generated from different mod-
els of inflation. It will be valuable to use our method on the
future generation CMB experiments to constrain such models
that predict minute levels of primordial non-Gaussianities.

We use publicly available HEALPix Górski et al. (2005)
package available from http://healpix.sourceforge.net to per-
form forward and backward spherical harmonic transfor-
mations and for visualization purposes. We acknowledge
the use of the Legacy Archive for Microwave Background
Data Analysis (LAMBDA). LAMBDA is a part of the High
Energy Astrophysics Science Archive Center (HEASARC).
HEASARC/LAMBDA is supported by the Astrophysics Sci-
ence Division at the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.

REFERENCES

Acquaviva, V., Bartolo, N., Matarrese, S., & Riotto, A. 2003, Nuclear
Physics B, 667, 119

Allen, T. J., Grinstein, B., & Wise, M. B. 1987, Physics Letters B, 197, 66
Baccigalupi, C., Perrotta, F., de Zotti, G., et al. 2004, MNRAS, 354, 55
Balaji, K. R. S., Brandenberger, R. H., & Easson, D. A. 2003, J. Cosmology

Astropart. Phys., 12, 008
Bartolo, N., Komatsu, E., Matarrese, S., & Riotto, A. 2004, Phys. Rep., 402,

103
Basak, S., & Delabrouille, J. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 1163
—. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 18
Bennett, C. L., Smoot, G. F., Hinshaw, G., et al. 1992, ApJ, 396, L7
Bennett, C. L., Hill, R. S., Hinshaw, G., et al. 2003, ApJS, 148, 97
Bennett, C. L., Larson, D., Weiland, J. L., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 20
Bouchet, F. R., Prunet, S., & Sethi, S. K. 1999, MNRAS, 302, 663
Bucher, M. 2015, International Journal of Modern Physics D, 24, 1530004
Bucher, M., Moodley, K., & Turok, N. 2001, Physical Review Letters, 87,

191301
Bunn, E. F., Fisher, K. B., Hoffman, Y., et al. 1994, ApJ, 432, L75
Cabella, P., & Kamionkowski, M. 2004, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints,

astro-ph/0403392
Crittenden, R., Davis, R. L., & Steinhardt, P. J. 1993, ApJ, 417, L13
Crittenden, R. G., Coulson, D., & Turok, N. G. 1995, Phys. Rev. D, 52,

R5402
Delabrouille, J., Cardoso, J.-F., Le Jeune, M., et al. 2009, A&A, 493, 835
Eriksen, H. K., Banday, A. J., Górski, K. M., & Lilje, P. B. 2004, ApJ, 612,

633
Eriksen, H. K., Dickinson, C., Jewell, J. B., et al. 2008a, ApJ, 672, L87
Eriksen, H. K., Jewell, J. B., Dickinson, C., et al. 2008b, ApJ, 676, 10
Eriksen, H. K., Huey, G., Saha, R., et al. 2007, ApJ, 656, 641
Finkbeiner, D. P., Davis, M., & Schlegel, D. J. 1999, ApJ, 524, 867
Fixsen, D. J., Cheng, E. S., Gales, J. M., et al. 1996, ApJ, 473, 576
Frewin, R. A., Polnarev, A. G., & Coles, P. 1994, MNRAS, 266, L21
Gangui, A., Lucchin, F., Matarrese, S., & Mollerach, S. 1994, ApJ, 430, 447
Gangui, A., Martin, J., & Sakellariadou, M. 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 66, 083502
Gold, B., Bennett, C. L., Hill, R. S., et al. 2009, ApJS, 180, 265
Gold, B., Odegard, N., Weiland, J. L., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 15
Górski, K. M., Hivon, E., Banday, A. J., et al. 2005, ApJ, 622, 759

Guth, A. H. 1981, Phys. Rev. D, 23, 347
Hansen, F. K., & Górski, K. M. 2003, MNRAS, 343, 559
Hinshaw, G., Nolta, M. R., Bennett, C. L., et al. 2007, Astrophys. J. Suppl.

Ser., 170, 288
Hu, W., & Okamoto, T. 2002, ApJ, 574, 566
Hyvärinen, A., & Oja, E. 2000, Neural Netw., 13, 411
Kamionkowski, M., Kosowsky, A., & Stebbins, A. 1997, Physical Review

Letters, 78, 2058
Kim, J., Naselsky, P., & Christensen, P. R. 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 103002
—. 2009, Phys. Rev. D, 79, 023003
Knox, L., & Song, Y.-S. 2002, Physical Review Letters, 89, 011303
Komatsu, E., Kogut, A., Nolta, M. R., et al. 2003, ApJS, 148, 119
Kosowsky, A. 1996, Annals of Physics, 246, 49
—. 1999, New A Rev., 43, 157
Lewis, A., Challinor, A., & Turok, N. 2002, Phys. Rev. D, 65, 023505
Linde, A. D. 1983, Physics Letters B, 129, 177
Lubin, P., Melese, P., & Smoot, G. 1983, ApJ, 273, L51
Maldacena, J. 2003, Journal of High Energy Physics, 5, 013
Mather, J. C., Cheng, E. S., Eplee, Jr., R. E., et al. 1990, ApJ, 354, L37
Mather, J. C., Cheng, E. S., Cottingham, D. A., et al. 1994, ApJ, 420, 439
Munshi, D., Souradeep, T., & Starobinsky, A. A. 1995, ApJ, 454, 552
Negroponte, J., & Silk, J. 1980, Physical Review Letters, 44, 1433
Padmanabhan, N., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2005, Phys. Rev. D, 72, 023508
Page, L., Hinshaw, G., Komatsu, E., et al. 2007, ApJS, 170, 335
Penzias, A. A., & Wilson, R. W. 1965, ApJ, 142, 419
Planck Collaboration, Ade, P. A. R., Aghanim, N., et al. 2014, A&A, 571,

A24
Planck Collaboration, Adam, R., Ade, P. A. R., et al. 2016a, A&A, 594, A9
—. 2016b, A&A, 594, A10
Planck Collaboration, Ade, P. A. R., Aghanim, N., et al. 2016c, A&A, 594,

A13
—. 2016d, A&A, 594, A17
—. 2016e, A&A, 594, A20
Polnarev, A. G. 1985, Soviet Ast., 29, 607
Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., & Vetterling, W. T. 1989,

Numerical recipes in C. The art of scientific computing
Rees, M. J. 1968, ApJ, 153, L1



Separating Gaussian CMB polarization signal 19

Remazeilles, M., Delabrouille, J., & Cardoso, J.-F. 2011a, MNRAS, 410,
2481

—. 2011b, ArXiv e-prints, arXiv:1103.1166
Rogers, K. K., Peiris, H. V., Leistedt, B., McEwen, J. D., & Pontzen, A.

2016a, MNRAS, 460, 3014
—. 2016b, MNRAS, 463, 2310
Saha, R. 2011, ApJ, 739, L56
Saha, R., & Aluri, P. K. 2016, ApJ, 829, 113
Saha, R., Jain, P., & Souradeep, T. 2006, ApJ, 645, L89
Saha, R., Prunet, S., Jain, P., & Souradeep, T. 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 78,

023003
Samal, P. K., Saha, R., Delabrouille, J., et al. 2010, ApJ, 714, 840
Samal, P. K., Saha, R., Jain, P., & Ralston, J. P. 2008, MNRAS, 385, 1718
Seljak, U., & Zaldarriaga, M. 1999, Physical Review Letters, 82, 2636

Spergel, D. N., & Zaldarriaga, M. 1997, Physical Review Letters, 79, 2180
Stark, R. F. 1981a, MNRAS, 195, 127
—. 1981b, MNRAS, 195, 115
Starobinsky, A. A. 1982, Physics Letters B, 117, 175
Sudevan, V., Aluri, P. K., Yadav, S. K., Saha, R., & Souradeep, T. 2017, ApJ,

842, 62
Tegmark, M., & de Oliveira-Costa, A. 2001, Phys. Rev. D, 64, 063001
Tegmark, M., de Oliveira-Costa, A., & Hamilton, A. J. 2003, Phys. Rev. D,

68, 123523
Tegmark, M., & Efstathiou, G. 1996a, MNRAS, 281, 1297
—. 1996b, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 281, 1297
Wands, D. 2010, Classical and Quantum Gravity, 27, 124002
Zaldarriaga, M. 1997, Phys. Rev. D, 55, 1822
Zaldarriaga, M., & Seljak, U. 1998, Phys. Rev. D, 58, 023003


	ABSTRACT
	Introduction
	The problem
	Measure of non-Gaussianity
	Basic Formalism
	Input Maps
	Data Preparation
	Foreground and noise properties

	Masks
	Non Gaussian nature of polarized foregrounds from density analysis
	Calibrating the non-Gaussian measure
	Non-Gaussian Nature of WMAP maps
	Kurtosis variation without foreground
	Methodology
	Results
	Foreground cleaned Stokes Q and U maps
	Comparison with Input Stokes Q and U Maps
	Difference with Input Polarization Maps
	Variance Analysis
	Power Spectrum
	Comparison with Input Power Spectra
	Comparison with WMAP foreground-reduced Power Spectra


	Validation using Monte-Carlo simulations
	Input maps
	CMB Maps
	Foreground Maps
	Detector Noise Maps

	Results

	Discussion and Conclusion

